For our alibi, recording Mr Preet Munaram on the 7th of March 2024.
Hi Preet, tell me about your father's life in Mauritius.
Right, my father was the eldest of seven children and he lived in a place called Cupid in Mauritius.
He was born on the 7th of May 1932. He was a very hard working young man and tried his hand at
everything. Sport, education, he had an extreme thirst for knowledge. Books, surrounded himself
with books and being the eldest of a family where their father had died when they were quite young,
he became the breadwinner. He spent very little of his childhood in his mother's house. He was
living with his uncle who lived 13 miles away from the family home. So my dad had a 13 mile cycle trip
to school every day. He won what was called an open scholarship to attend the Royal College in Cupid,
which was a fee-paying school but he won an open scholarship. He came from quite a poor background
as you can imagine but he was the highest scoring pupil on the whole of the island.
So he won this scholarship to go to the school. Whilst he was a pupil there, he was very
entrepreneurial and started giving private lessons to boys and girls who quite didn't reach the
expectation that they were supposed to but had a bit of money.
And he helped fund the education of his siblings. He was quite strict with his siblings and insisted
that they, boys and girls, both insisted that both of them complete school to at least A level.
And testimony to that is that the four brothers all embarked on different professions, accountant,
headmaster of a school, surgeon and my dad doing what he did. The girls became school teachers
and headmistresses of various schools, which was quite rare really in the 50s and early 60s.
After finishing school at the age of 18, my dad decided to work for a while because he had to
raise money to come to Britain and to take a degree. He'd applied to study medicine in
St Andrews in Edinburgh and his plan was that it would take him about 10 years to raise sufficient
funds to fund his course and fund his time in Britain. In the meantime of course he met my
mother and life takes on a different course. They got married. My mum came from quite a very
quite a wealthy background and it was a match made in heaven actually because
they would both be sotted with each other from the moment they met. It was a love marriage,
not arranged, you know, contrary to the normal Asian expectation of life. And they were happily
married until his death in 1990, sorry 2001. My father continued to work then in Mauritius. He
taught in a Church of England school called St Andrews where he taught sciences and English
and French to write up to Cambridge certificate A level. And funny enough some of the pupils in
there were his siblings in that school and various other family members who all remember him with
affection. He was very keen on school sports days, extracurricular activities like boy scouts. My mum
was involved with the guides and he raised the expectations of the children he came across to
expect be the best they could. And years later you meet people who've said that's what he did for us.
He was passionate about teaching, absolutely passionate about it. Then he was due to come to
Britain in 1957. Unfortunately the island was hit by a cyclone and as you can see from this
photograph here our house was demolished by cyclone Carroll. That's my dad standing amongst
the ruins and he spent the next five years earning enough money to rebuild the house,
in which time my brother and myself were born. So that changed plans completely. His chances of
doing medicine as he saw it had gone out of the window because in those days it took seven years
and that was just far too long. By the time he was coming to Britain he was 30 years of age and
he decided seven years in higher education wouldn't be feasible. So he supported his younger brother
who went to Trinity in Dublin to study medicine and my dad followed a few years later and went
to Cardiff University. However before going there my mother and myself were sent over
with my elder brother to Britain to acclimatise to the weather over here. My dad decided that we
should come over in June of 1962 as it was still the British summer and he would follow at the end
of the term time in Mauritius and come over to start his degree in the September of that year.
My mother, my brother, myself and a girl called Geeta came over to Britain together, my mum in
charge of all of us and we arrived at London Airport Heathrow, fresh off the boat as they say,
and we took a coach to Victoria coach station where we were met by my mother's sister who had
been in Britain since 1951 and she had arranged a flat for us in Bayswater and she put us into a
taxi and my mum met with the landlady and the landlady told my mother what the rent would be.
My mum worked out that this would wipe out her whole year's allowance in about a month
and promptly jumped back into the taxi and we ended up back at Victoria station.
Fortunately for us there were some former scouts of my dad who'd also arrived and they helped us
find some temporary accommodation in Victoria in London. Shortly after that my mum found a more
permanent house in Norwood Junction and we had a one-bedroomed flat. There was my mum, my brother,
myself and Geeta and we shared this flat for the whole of the summer of 1962 until my mum
arranged the wedding of Geeta with her then-husband, still of today,
Dale Maddew and they still very happily live in London to this day and my mum organized the wedding
literally a few months after arriving in Britain. Then our life in Britain began. 1962 my father
arrived in London, he moved to Cardiff to find us accommodation, he found us a flat in Richmond
Crescent and we all moved to Cardiff. My dad attended Cardiff University and I went to a little
nursery school in Richmond Road called Nurseryland. My brother went to Albany Infant School, Albany
Junior School and my cousin who was with us went to Rother Park and my dad attended university for
the year 1962 to 63 and as events happened my mum became pregnant with my youngest brother,
Vin and that changed everything because my dad decided that funding would be an issue because
he was self-funding. So he decided to take a break from university for the academic year 1963 to 64
and he got the job in Hlan Wyrn in the steelworks programming computers which were very much the new
thing and because he was a mathematician it was second nature to him. He traveled from Cardiff to
Hlan Wyrn every day to do this job and in the evenings he would run the adult education department
at Grangetown Adult Education Centre teaching English to overseas people and he did that for
his entire time that he was doing his degree from 1963 to 1966. He completed it after the year of
Unininefmany in Hlan Wyrn, he came back to his studies in Cardiff University and finally graduated
in 1966. After graduation he couldn't get a job in education and he was working as a labourer
for Cardiff Corporation cutting grass and it wasn't until the former leader of the Labour Council,
Jack Sloan saw him cutting the grass of the mansion house and said, Rav what are you doing?
And my father said I'm earning money to feed my family and look after them and Jack Sloan actually
said well we've a teacher shortage in Cardiff, this is ridiculous. Next thing my father gets a
letter from the education department and he's offered a job teaching French in Sintwale High
School in Ely and Sintwale was a secondary modern school, quite a tough school, quite a tough area
but like everything he did he did it with relish and total enthusiasm and from 1967 to 1960 end of
1969 he taught the boys French and anything else they needed assistance with and at the end of it
you know some in fact 30 40 years later I met some of the pupils by pure accident from the school
who commented that he was one of the few teachers who taught them who treated them with any respect
and dignity and typical Asian he turned up every day to this school smartly dressed in a suit
and showed the boys they could be better than their expectations that they were led to believe by
their expectations they were more than limitations put upon them. Day one of the school my dad went
along in his suit and briefcase always had the briefcase and he came home from from work that
day and he had a huge black eye and we just thought what an earth has happened you've been in a fight
someone of the boys didn't like took took a dislike to you and he said no I was playing football with
the boys in the yard and we went up to head a ball and someone's head caught me and from that day on
I think the boys took to him they absolutely took to him I remember going on a school trip with them
I was in junior school and we'd had a and my dad had organized a school trip for these boys they'd
never been anywhere and he'd organized because no one had trusted them to leave the city and he took
them to Bristol Zoo he and another teacher called John Davis and another good friend of his from
the school Len Williams who was the woodwork teacher John Davis was the music teacher and this
coach was full of boys and we turned I turned up at the school with my dad just before half past
eight in the morning and the school is full of you know 14 15 year old boys running around I was in
junior school infant school and my dad shouted out to this one boy said Churchill this is my son take
care of him and that's the last I saw of my dad until the coach came back from Bristol Zoo I spent
the whole of the day with these boys at the back of the coach for the whole of the trip and it was
absolutely amazing a good day out with some really special people and I won't mention what happened
in the gift shop though can you tell us a little bit about the reception of your father at the
school in Ely when he initially arrived because that was back in the days in what 1960 1969 yeah
yeah um initially some of the parents weren't happy with being taught having their children taught by
an Asian man and there was a period where um he was received or we were receiving obscene phone
calls on on the home telephone because all your telephone numbers were published in a phone directory
in those days do you know what that is a phone directory yeah um and he um people used to phone
us the police actually put a trace and they went on for quite a while and the police put a trace on
the line and they identified where the call was coming from and typical of my dad he didn't want
to press charges he just went to go and pay the parents a visit and ask them why they were doing
it and turn them around really just meeting them having a chat with them and it just stopped from
then on and so I'm sensing that he was meant met initially with some um racism and resentment
well I think that featured right throughout his life to be quite honest in Britain right throughout
his life um but it was never used as a badge for him he never used it as a reason not to be able
to do anything in fact he raised himself above it and everything he did he he he didn't allow
himself to become restrained by anything colour or being told you can't do this funding he he just
was bigger than than than his job
so racism wasn't really it was there it was you know it'd be stupid not to say it wasn't there
but um he never let it become a limiting factor on his life
life
yeah so moving on now to um teaching um at in a league he was also at the same time in
Grange Townstall yes he was teaching adult education in the great and I have letters of
testimony from the warden of the centre who absolutely sends a glowing reference of him
um saying that um you know this man should be doing more than he is you know he shouldn't be
limited by the type of posts he was being offered or not offered as the case may be
after Ely the job in Fitzallan came up and that basically was uh in those days this was 1969
um there had been um a lot of children coming in from former British colonies
from the Indian subcontinent whose it who for whom English was a second language and for whom
a lot of the parents didn't speak English in the home so what South Glamorgan education department
Cardiff education department decided to do was to house them in one building in Fitzallan high
school which they very nicely called the immigrant block and it was a three or four story building
where all the kids from non-English speaking backgrounds were put and before my dad arrived
they were being treated as educationally so normal they were treated they were banded as
ESN and a lot of their day would be spent litter picking around the yard because no one knew what
to do with them and they were not part of mainstream school and they didn't have school
uniforms you know they weren't told to wear school uniforms you know they they didn't know what the
arrangements were in the school no one from the school actually directed them on that front
and so on my dad's first day there realizing that there may be cultural issues with teaching
some of the girls in school took my mum along with him and they had a conversation luckily
my mum speaks Urdu my dad speaks Hindi and they could communicate in some of the South
Asian languages South Indian languages and they were able to get across to the kids that um
to be part of this school we need to be look like the pupils in this school so we need to dress
in the same way and from then on um he called the parents in as well and actually got them on board
with um having school uniforms for their kids so they felt part of the school and it wasn't
uncommon for him because it was very they had very few teachers in the so-called immigrant block and
he came along um and i remember sitting on um occasional days when my dad had to look after
my younger brother and myself he'd take us into school with him so our occasional days off were
not spent at the park we'd go back to school and have the school so we'd be in this classroom and
on the way in my dad would always stop off at one of the shops in Grangetown and buy several bottles
of large bottles of pop and biscuits and crisps then we'd go into a classroom and there would be
something like 120 kids in one classroom of all ages ranging from 11 to almost 17 and he would
have them eating out of them all speaking different languages he would have them eating out of his hand
by the end of a sort of short session and it was just amazing you know he'd be teaching them the
same thing because they all had to learn English they all had to get on board with this and um
the pop and the crisps and the biscuits were for them you know in their break time and um
he also thought it was important to get to the parents because he realized that he was
trying to teach the kids English in school they were going home and speaking in mother town
and the parents weren't able to communicate in English to the children so I think that's where
the idea of the pavilion or the parade came along teaching English as a second he'd always been
involved in teaching English as a second language to overseas people and he decided to contact some
of the parents he would go to their homes he would take my mother along and encourage them
to come to classes and I as a young boy of 11 12 years old I remember doing leaflet drops around
Grangetown and Bute town to various houses in Riverside of these English classes that
been run by this man Ravi Muniram in Seven Road adult community centre
Seven Road was a school in in Grangetown and he would run these classes every evening and
this was on top of the day job by the way he would run these classes and then increase the
staff you would get various people involved various people who studied English teaching
of English as a second language and things grew from there really the opportunity to take up the
tenure of the parade came up when Cardiff High School the girls abandoned the school in 1971
because they amalgamated with the boys school in T. Kelly so there was a lovely old Victorian
Victorian building empty on the parade literally 1971 summer 1971 and I remember receiving a phone
call from my dad on the landline and he said I was 13 at the time and he said you've got a toolbox
have you and I said yes he said bring it over I've just taken over a building on the parade
it's the old Cardiff High School for girls so I went around to number 28 which was the old
main building of the school I walked in and literally the school had shut in at the end of
term in July 71 and the bins were still full of the rubbish because no one was coming back
so our first job was to empty the bins and clean the floors etc etc he had a caretaker there who
wasn't very receptive to working for my dad and who lived in the top floor of number 28 he had an
apartment in number 28 parade and he was not very cooperative with opening doors for functions that
went on there for cleaning the building for organizing cleaners cleaning stuff to come in
because he didn't like the idea of working for my dad so my dad quite often would be seen with a
brush after spending a full day teaching and a full day doing adult work sweeping the floor in
the parade to clean the building after it had been used and I you know I've helped him do it on occasion
um but on a positive note um the parade became an amazing building where at the end of his 22-23
years of running the place and developing it it became a hub for some 4 000 people a week
using it and it was people from all backgrounds all communities in life
you know which I can go into detail if you wish um use that building please do give us some detail
well let me pick up a photograph and have a look at this
this these are pictures of the summer schools that used to go on in the parade every
June July and August when school term finished my dad would run summer schools in the parade for
those kids who were struggling in various subjects in school kids from all backgrounds all communities
would attend this school and he did this for as long as I can remember not only that he would
also organize I think this picture here is actually of an exchange group um he would have
the exchange groups from Nantes and Stuttgart our twin cities coming over and staying for a month
in Britain being hosted out by various families and we on occasion hosted some of these kids who
would come over and they were pre-university you know they were a 17 18 year olds who were basically
on a holiday here but would have to spend morning of the weekday learning English as a set because
prior to going to their universities in Stuttgart or Germany or France you know and uh so over the
years um he became like a foster parent to these groups of 70 80 kids for the whole summer um I
tell you a story of um one night where these uh a group of German guys and girls got stuck in
Barry and this was pre-mobile phones so believe me it was prehistoric and we get a phone call on
the landline uh we're in the Barry police station I thought oh no what's going on they didn't have
any money and they couldn't get home so I remember ferrying these kids home I did about five trips in
the car to ferry them home to their various homes in around Cardiff that night and the one thing I
remember is I kept on asking them the time because I was frustrated and a few days later they turned
up at the house with a present of a watch for me but there we are that's another story but um
yeah these these photographs here they're of which there are numerous spanning various eras
you know we have pictures of young Vietnamese children from the first waves of immigration into
Britain of the so-called Vietnamese boat people and the reception that they received in the parade
my dad worked with the Welsh Refugee Council to make sure that people were being treated properly
the community the Community Relations Council the Criminal Justice Board these were just a few
of the things that he did that were extracurricular um so he organized he not only hosted the kids over
here but he took groups of uh children from this area 18 17 18 year olds over to Stuttgart and
Nantes in exchange and my mum would always accompany him with that so they became like these
children surrogate parents on these trips and my mum quite often would come home from these trips
and say you know on two nights I had groups of girls in my bedroom talking about they'd fallen
in love with someone some French guy on the trip how were they ever going to come back to Cardiff
and my mum would be sitting there trying to console them you know
and the letters of thanks you would get afterwards were just incredible
there were other photographs there's one in here of a chap called Jürgen Gutmann with a German
from I think from Stuttgart in the 1972 there was a touring company called Moral Rearmament which is
a big international organization and it staged a play a musical called the Song of Asia
and there were people from all over the world in this cast and they went touring around the world
with this this this musical called Song of Asia and they ended up playing in the Sherman Theatre
and we hosted Jürgen Gutmann um on his time here we had him staying with us for about three weeks
whilst the touring company was here and they he became a very good friend and uh there's just a
picture of him later on with his young family and his life back in Germany just saying how much it
meant to him to well to have been here and to get their message of moral rearmament around the uh
around the world um dad was also involved with the interfaith associations where um the the church
the leaders of various religious groups would meet in the parade rabbis imams priests vickers
reverends you name it they would meet and you know talk about issues of the day and go back to their
various religious organizations and disseminate what they'd heard in the parade and
meeting other people it was a forum where people could come together
and be open-minded which was what which is if you look at the world now we could do with a bit of
that now a little bit of understanding a little bit of um respect for other people's viewpoint
a little bit of compassion i think that summed up the parade really and summed up certainly summed
up my dad well i was going to say that they're they're your father reverend moonram and 28th
parade are kind of inextricable but i would like to uh pull them in tees and apart slightly so i
think one of things that um i'm hearing really is that um your father was a powerhouse and a pioneer
for for transformation in the education system for the global majority who'd come overseas
and he really you know going into that school um and it just being a block of um students who are
totally unaware i mean that's really shocking to me um but for him to turn that around so
so can you give us an idea of like how many pupils oh crumbs where'd you begin it would be in the
thousands it would be in the absolute thousands you know you could literally i mean it's dad
retired in 1993 i meet people now taxi drivers for example or builders or guys working in hospitals
an accountant the other day um you know people who from all walks of life and have said to me
oh moon around we know that name um and i'm thinking they're thinking of my younger brother
who had a law firm in cardiff and they say no he was a teacher um how is he and then i break the
news that he passed away a long time ago oh and they say well do you know and they all have a
story to tell they all have a story to tell it's not as if they were some insignificant
those kids were never insignificant to him everyone was important as the next person
and i also get a sense that he has a huge personality and he was constantly engaging
with people i think you know looking back on it i used to cringe because you do cringe what your
parents do you do cringe what you know you don't want to be involved in their life you know you
dad's telling you oh i'm doing a function with the parade tonight and i'm thinking oh no i don't
want to be there i want to be out with my friends and um but yeah his personality was enormous and
i used to cringe because he he would project himself and i know why he was doing it there
was no one else doing it for him there was no one else saying oh ravi moonram is doing this down in
the parade he had confidence and he always had confidence though from a young man everyone you
know you speak to his i had the opportunity and good fortune to meet his best friend you know he
came over on holiday once and um manna and he was telling me about my dad and then i meet other
people from maritius who tell me about my dad as a young man and how he was a leader there's no doubt
about it he was a leader you know but a kind one it wasn't dictate he wasn't a dictator
he was a leader you know he he actually brought people along with him and i think if i was to
sum him up in in a professional capacity i would say he was bigger than any job he took on bigger
than any job he never allowed himself to be defined by that task in that job he would always look
the owner's son to britain to experience some time with john windows williams because of their
business relationship they sent over ht solanke harry solanke and he came over in summer of 1970
and uh my father had a phone call one summer's evening from john when john williams himself
john of john windows and he said oh can you help out i have this indian man here i don't know what
to do with him and it wasn't a racist thing he literally didn't know how to communicate with
harry harry didn't speak english so my dad went along next thing we know harry's with my dad and
he lived with us for three months while he was on his sabbatical with john windows at the end of it
he sent a letter of thanks to my dad he wrote regularly but that's his family in india and
when he heard of the miners strike in britain and how we were having blackouts in the early 70s
he air freighted food over to us from india air freighted fresh mangoes and yeah and my dad had
to go and collect it from the depot at e-throw right so he had to drive to e-throw to get this
crate of food and that wasn't the only example the managing directors of panasonic with whom my dad
was a matsushita electric in pentwind they heard about that when the miners strikes were on and how
things were supposedly difficult in britain for getting things they thought we were all on rations
they flew over fresh salmon to our house it was just unbelievable you know my dad wasn't into
taking gifts and all that sort of stuff an example of that is when the panasonic connection
um vhs recorders had just come into being and um we still had a black and white television
though at home and when i heard my dad was doing work with the managing directors and that's a
shooter my little eyes lit up star trek in color i thought this is fantastic dad are they going to
give you a tv are they going to give you a tv well he came home one day and there was a tv
and a video recorder i thought this is it i'm in heaven vin and myself we sat there and we thought
we've actually got one a tv next thing i know my dad is carrying it out of the house
the tv the video it ended up in the parade he wouldn't take it personally as a gift
and that's where it ended up they they had the first pop-up video cassette recorders
there's something about the character of your father that is very altruistic very philanthropic
incredibly generous um a heart that strikes me as being as uh you know deep as an ocean
as wise to see um and of course he was doing all of these numerous jobs yeah so one would think
that he could afford his own television can you tell me oh the story of the television
i know it's going backwards i'm sorry about this but it is an important story
it's of when we arrived in britain my dad we arrived to our flat in in richard crescent
and it was winter was coming up and it was the big freeze winter and we'd heard tales we'd never
seen snow we'd never seen ice you know didn't know what it was going to be like so my dad went
around to a little electrical shop because there was no central heating in those flats in those
days we went around to a little electrical shop on salsbury road and it was just on the corner
see a blue shop a little tiny little blue shop and it was run by a gentleman called carl joseph
carlton joseph from jamaica and i walked into the shop and there was this big tall jamaican
man standing behind the counter carlton joseph and he looked down at me and smiled and my dad said
and he said to my dad how can i help you and my dad said i'd like an electric fire please
and my dad bought a one a two bar electric fire so we went he said and carl as he later became
uncle carl said to my dad what about a television you need a television you've got children haven't
you and he said my dad turned around and said you must be joking i'm a student i can't afford a
television he said don't you worry about that where do you live and my dad said no no no no
anyway found out where we lived in richmond crescent and he turned up that evening with a
television set one he'd cobbled together and kept us in televisions free of charge you know they'd
be they'd break down you just phone uncle carl he'd come around and repair the television and
money was never exchanged hands occasionally my mum and dad would cook him a meal he'd come around
and we got to know his family really well over the years but kindness of strangers kindness of
strangers and that has stayed with me all my life that really kind people and then the reynolds
family down the road john reynolds and dorothy reynolds and hit their children pete and prashin
number 46 richmond road when my mum gave birth to vin she was she was working up until she gave birth
and then she thought oh my goodness what am i going to do you know we need to work to earn money
and um after staying at home for a little bit with vin she was talking to dorothy what am i going to
do i you know i can't afford nursery cover and all this dorothy said send the baby to me so vin for
the first six seven months of his life would go down to number 46 richmond road with dorothy and
my mum would go to work what is your kindness of strangers what did your mum work with oh
when she came here she was working she got jobs as clerks you know she's working in her first job
was a company called bell and nicholson in chichol way and basically wages clerk you know they have
lots of typing going on and ledger bookkeeping ledger keeping that sort of stuff things that
you know don't exist anymore because of advent of technology but uh yeah and then she worked
with she's had jobs in uh in the evening she was also working part-time in the evening because we
needed money she would work in the cigar factory on uh panarth road making cigars now i always
in vagi imagined people making cigars under a waterfall in brazil and rolling the leaves out
on their thighs but of course you know that doesn't happen no my mum used to work in the
cigar factory called uh mannequin the mannequin cigar factory freemans and uh she we used to go
and drop her off after after school her shift would start at six o'clock at night and uh this
is after doing the day job my dad would drop her off and at nine o'clock we'd go and pick her up
we'd go for the ride you know from roth to panarth road exotic pick mum up and
this was also whilst your father was teaching right yeah my father was teaching yeah yeah
so we we have a story of two parents who are working working day jobs and night jobs with
children yeah with children not only their children two others as well we had shake and my cousin
and his sister who was studying in college across the road cardiff institute which is gone now
um she was learning um she was trained to become a secretary and then she went back to mariches
but she studied here for three years and lived with us for three years and shake was living with
us and my my my dad never took money from the family to have you know he considered that an
insult if they paid him you know the attitude i think it's a very much an asian thing you know
um if we're cooking for one we can cook for two doesn't matter okay so just getting a sense of
the early your early life settling in cardiff and sounds like it was really um
hard work not for us not for the children but for your parents hard work for your parents yeah um
and i feel now maybe we can focus on what was happening in the parade okay um
um because i understand and i have experience being a ugandan refugee that we use the parade
for nothing and we were one of the communities that used the parade so i'm interested to know
a bit more about the parade who used the parade and what went on in the day yeah what communities
this is the photograph number 28 i have it here my dad standing outside and various people on the
steps of number 28 which is very distinctive it's the sea master it was the old sea master's house
that goes up up in the gallery upstairs it's a 360 degree viewing gallery in the top of number
28 the parade and that was i always thought that what an amazing the caretaker had an amazing place
to live in andy absolutely amazing place that was and he hardly used that room hardly used that
south glomorgan owned the building they still do or the council owned the building he was part of
the education department and my dad with his persuasive skills said oh well you know we need
a bigger place if we're going to teach adults as well because adult education was becoming a big
thing and i think cardiff realized that the director of education was very much on board with this
actually very much realized that adult education was an important aspect of integrating people
into life in britain and if you can't communicate with as an adult with your doctor or your pharmacist
or your work colleagues you see we didn't have huge asian populations in carlisle like lester
where they will support networks in place like parts of birmingham where people could stick to
mother tongue and get on quite well cardiff there has to be a certain amount of integration it's
quite it was quite a small city and in that respect people had to get on and adapt to their new life
and uh yeah the communities that use the parade were as diverse as there are communities on this
planet so they're italians greeks um old somali communities from cardiff indian communities
bangladeshi pakistani communities all with their own little um customs that they wanted to keep
alive you know they were in a different place they didn't have places where they could meet
and if you look at the kenyan asian immigration to britain or ugandan asian
immigration to britain a lot of these people were kicked out with nothing that you know idy amin
was not very kind to the asian people that were made to leave um uganda and they forfeited a lot
and testament to them that a lot of them grabbed their bootlaces and got on with it
they absolutely got on with it but can you tell me how the communities used the space
and was that outside was it a school as well in the daytime in like culturally as well as
their cultural events did that happen well there was teaching that was first and foremost the
centre for teaching english as a foreign language to people who say who for whom english was not a
first language so you had adults being taught there in the daytime adults being sent there from
various organizations adults realizing they needed to speak english to get on in the community
adults realizing they needed to speak english to get on with their neighbors you know and to be
able to have an effective life here and that used to go on in the daytime at the weekends you'd have
saturday school where kids from mainstream schools around cardiff would come to the parade
and learn english or better their english and then it would extend into other subjects you know dad
was very partial to stick in his hand in with the mathematics and sciences he still loved his
sciences throughout life although he actually didn't get a chance to do anything with that
but the cultural side of it you should come along in the evenings in the evenings various groups
would put their names down and say on wednesday night the ismaili association would like to have
a function at the parade and quite often you know we'd find ourselves being invited to various
functions i say you don't want to get involved in your parents lives but sometimes you had to
because there were friends involved so you'd go along to various functions and you'd have the
Sikh community coming along and they'd have a function and i don't think there were weddings
that took place there i don't think that ever happened but it was usually times of religious
festival someone would be celebrating something at easter you'd probably have the italians and
the greeks doing something and from that comes other people seeing you doing these things and
taking part some people would not want to they think oh well you keep it to yourself but there
was a lot of open mindedness as well a lot of people would want to know what's going on and a
great way in with asian people or historically has always been the food thing people always think
that's what associates people but you know you look at it now it's very trendy isn't it you watch
these chefy programs they're traveling around the world telling us how you know it's how food
integrates people but we've known that all our lives so i remember as a child in the 1970s being
part of that smite community and we used the parade for free for friday prayers and and
um and for big religious occasions and i also understand that the the puja community yeah
and the hindu community before they found spaces of their own used so i get an understanding that
the 28th parade was a place where all communities gravitated for help and for space and support
for nothing courtesy of your father right that's right that's right and quite often if they
you know he'd have a chat with some of the um so-called leaders of these groups who are
usually you know professional people or business people they understood how things work make a
contribution to this for the council or whatever you know or do this and i i've often heard people
they're saying oh muniram must be making a fortune out of this and nothing made me more angry than
to hear that because if you knew my dad money was the last thing of course he realized the the value
of money to live but money to have money for the sake of it was never his thing and he certainly
wouldn't take money to for education no if you could just elaborate clarify that for me so what
i'm hearing is that um he he had a salary as a teacher yeah um but his extracurricular activities
well he wasn't people he did for nothing yeah when he when he ran the parade he became the community
education officer um and basically he was his task was to ensure the teaching of english as a second
language to children in south clamorgan schools so he was the county chief community education officer
so he would have to liaise with every school junior high grammar you name it in our area
so he knew all the headmasters and they had a fantastic working relationship with him
fantastic rush there's a file here of thank of congratulations letters that have come from such
a dive i didn't even know these existed you you focused my mind on this i didn't even know these
existed until i went into the garage to pull out these files that have been sat in a filing cabinet
for the past 30 years and these letters of thanks from every single organization you can imagine
when dad had his award he was he was actually awarded an mbe for services to community relations
in 1981 and there's a letter from the prime minister the then prime minister margaret thatcher
of the day telling him he she has nominated him she's putting forward um to receive an award he
had to keep it quiet because this letter came out in november that he should be given an award in
the queen's honours list and she was making making a recommendation to the queen the for 1982 the new
year's honours list of 1982 for my dad to get this award we didn't even know anything about it until
my dad came home with a newspaper on new year's eve and said look at this and there was a list
no picture it's just a name uh awards and new year's honours list published and his names there
that's the first we heard typical of him absolutely typical other things that were typical of him
were um my mum and dad were invited to a party private party on board the royal yacht britannia
and uh the by the queen and they have my dad gets this series of invitations from and yet you
could you could tell it was something important the envelopes even the postman was hanging around
to see what it was you know he'd be on the doorstep you can open it master of the household you know
on the big buff coloured envelope for a few weeks these letters used to come and what they were
they were instructions about how you what you should do not tell anyone you're going to this
party and they were vetting him for the next few weeks for security reasons you know they were
that he was vetted our car was vetted and all the rest of it but they went to this private party on
on board the royal yacht britannia and it was full of dignitaries and my dad now my dad that night
was gardening until six o'clock the reception was at 7 30 my dad was out in the garden gardening
hadn't bought gone out to buy a suit a new suit hadn't gone out to hire one and my mum had been
dressed for three weeks she'd been prepared for this her hair all her friends were involved
someone bought an orchid for her for her hair the hairdresser vied came and did her hair insisted
on doing her hair but people in city road there was a different feel about city road in those days
you know the the shops were different and we knew everyone and you'd go into the uh the delicatessen
the greek people right you must drive past when you're going so literally they had to drive down
city road before they went to join the royal yacht and uh anyway they got on board this yacht and uh
they were just being you know just in the corner keeping themselves to themselves
next thing that happens the queen's private secretary approached my dad approached my dad
and said oh her majesty would like to speak to you sometime this evening anyway some time later
he comes across said right she's ready so my dad goes and speaks to the queen with mum and they
were chatting and typical of my dad he does his research he does his research he spoke to her
about her commonwealth speech of 1977 the speech that she delivered in canada and delivered it in
french and he commented on particular points of the speech to the queen apparently my mum said her
face lit up and she said to my dad do you speak french i want from marisha's and they spoke in
french for about 10 or 15 minutes the queen and my dad spoke in french after that you couldn't get
these other people off them well which country you representing you know who are you and the whole
rest of it and my dad said well i'm ravi muni ram of roth so very humble in all of his undertakings
yeah and so um there is a sense that because he was a pioneer in in education and community in
in cardiff there was nothing no one was comparable nobody was doing what he was doing
and yet he was very humble about his undertakings can you tell me um did he ever share his inspiration
or what drove him the ideas behind he could see we were having challenges racial challenges yeah he
could see there was a he injustice was the core of whatever he did injustice and unfairness he just
wanted the people to have the best opportunity they could i mean he he came he was born out of
that you see he had come through a system of colonialism where you know you weren't meant to
be in certain things if you weren't you know from the motherland you know you you as a as a
colonized person you knew your place there was certain in in the civil service in marisha's at
the time there was only a certain level the indigenous indians could ever rise to and um
you know one interesting fact and probably for another day you know because it's too much to
talk about is um the seeds if i it wouldn't be too uh grandiose for me to say that the seeds of
independence in marisha's were sown in my grandfather's house the prime minister
siwa sagurangulam used to come to my grant my mum remembers it as a girl having um siwa sagurangulam
at their house as a young lawyer because he came to my grandfather's house who was an experienced
lawyer as his mentor and the seeds for independence which was a peaceful bloodless independence
seeking a breakaway from colonial rule happened in 1967 and he became the first prime minister
of marisha's and this then gives me an insight into your father's thinking because it seems he
was very progressive and ahead of his time and very much embodied inclusion every time i went
into the parade there was everybody was welcome there was no other male female whatever your
religion even if you were right wing yeah you know even if you were left wing it made no
difference he had teachers and would you say that marisha's offered a model a different way of
thinking i think marisha's forms you as a person in terms of you know you perhaps you're a little
bit naive you know i still think you know that people from the colonies are because you you have
this view of britain and you have this view of life you think everyone thinks like you you think
everyone is going to be as welcoming as you and then the stark reality of not being the case
you know hits home but with with that i think the bottom in all of this is that he was an absolute
machine you know and absolutely determined to do the best he could for others to open doors like
the mbe he took that but did he ever use it for himself no way it was to open doors because you
put that after you and especially in the early 80s you have that after your name you get a piece
of correspondence back people pay attention to what you're saying now he never used it to feather
ravie moonram's nest or grow ravie moonram's empire he did it there we are let's push so and so into
that role so would you say that he did it for the parade and all the people that came to the parade
sorting out i think he did it for everyone that came across that door they didn't have to be
members of the parade but everyone you know the parade really extended to 36 richmond road that
was like a satellite of the parade because the bell never stopped ringing people would finish in
the parade at 10 up doing their function at about half past nine ten o'clock at night they'd lock up
then their meetings would go on and my dad would be home because he would eat his evening meal
watching news at 10 every night that's when he got time to sit down have his evening meal
he would come home you hear the key going here's footsteps come down the hall he'd pour himself a
very small whiskey have that whilst his food was warming and sit down in the corner of the back
room in richmond road and watch the news at 10 every night and then usually very soon after that
the bell would ring or the phone would say oh ravi we need to see you or ravi bye that was usually
the one ravi bye or bye yeah we need to see you now now now desperately so need to see you we've
got a problem with so and so in our community well we've got a problem with this problem with that
he'd never say no and then it'd be the signing of the warrants for the police the police would come
at three because we were the you know they weren't doing it because he happened to be a
bloody good magistrate or anything like that it's because we were probably the first house on the
way out from the police station so three o'clock in the morning he'd be signing warrants for the
police and he would take it very seriously they would have to explain why they wanted a warrant
it wasn't just a rubber stamp quite often i'd be up because i would hear the bell he was a magistrate
so they would have to get magistrate's signature to undertake a warrant to get a warrant to either
go and arrest someone or to carry out a search if they were suspicious that something was going on
but they would have to so that's why we always had a bible or other religious book in our front
room they would have to swear that they were going to you know things were being done properly it
wasn't just a case of going to ramming around his house and getting these things signed off it never
happened and that's why he had such a a good relationship with the police you know he was
very well respected within the police community so i've heard you mention quite a few roles so just
in sequence can we hear your father's title for the parade was community education officer
and then south glomorgan that was it south glomorgan and the parade there south glomorgan
were the parade you know that way it was it was run by south glomorgan it was a part of south
glomorgan education committee and and his other roles then because you mentioned the magistrate
criminal justice board right he worked under here's a picture here of him with
home secretary douglas heard now he was a tory home secretary and but you know didn't matter
he worked with there we are that's douglas heard standing there that's my dad with him
his last home secretary worked with was jack straw and there's a letter in this stuff
that i found the other day thanking dad for his work on the community relations council
and criminal justice board so he was on the criminal justice board the community relations
council the welsh refugee council council for racial equality equality also amongst a few you
know and we have these letters here of congratulations when he was given his gong by the queen
saying you know just congratulating him they come from they come from all sorts of organizations
you know across the board you know it's just but always with um always associated with
um the global majority and justice and community yeah always so that was his main
yeah i you know what i said earlier on about um he not being defined by the jobs all this was
extracurricular to his day job he did all these things above and beyond his normal job so really
we're talking about him wanting to improve the quality of life for people for people generally
and i think in particular it strikes me um people of the global majority who are marginalized yeah
yeah um and in precarious circumstances when they come to this country that may show the person like
you know i remember many christmas days we're sitting down you know we have that just us the
family you know and shake and davina and their boys would come over perhaps my manchester lot
would come down and just a family thing in the house and quite often my dad would nip off somewhere
you know in the morning and next thing you know there's someone in town someone who was on their
own in this country you know someone who had no one or was feeling a bit down in the dumps i
remember remember it well you know every christmas there'd be say you know it used to get on my
brother's nerves i loved it i absolutely loved it but i know he used to wind my brothers up a bit
why can't we just do things with us for a change you know why can't it just be us but uh we know
we used to get on with it never used to complain to the person who was there they were always made
to feel welcome but do you feel your family suffered as a result of your father's philanthropic
crimes without well not suffered i didn't suffer um neither did my brothers we didn't suffer at all
we had immense freedom we didn't have the typical asian upbringing there were no expectations on us
to become lawyers doctors accountants it was none of that nonsense going on in the house you choose
what subjects you want to do you know it's as simple as that and you know if you want guidance
we weren't forced to i can never remember being forced to study or you must stay home and study
or you can't go to that disco or you can't see that girl it never happened it never happened or
you're not going out with them because they're not from our community it's never happened um but
certainly my mum had a tough time of it from the point of view we very rarely she very rarely had
holidays you know he was working flat out and the time he had holidays was when my brothers and
myself got a little bit older and we'd started earning some money and we actually went down to
the travel agents travel agents what are they the guys that happened before online yes um went down
to the travel agents and uh booked a holiday for them and said right you're going and presenting
him with the tickets oh he would most put out with that why did you do that why you know i'm
i only need a few days away but once he's away he loved it can you tell us when that was yeah it
was in the 80s definitely in the 80s our last family holiday was 1976 our last family holiday
but vin myself and my mum and dad not even my older brother because 76 he'd gone to university
but my mum and dad that was our last one a family holiday and my dad actually took us to
paris we went on train you know we went we drove to dover and we went on the train
to paris had a few days in paris and we came back to london it was heatwave here it was stiflingly
hot everywhere it was unbelievable you know it was so so hot so for somebody who is clearly such
a huge personality and an absolute powerhouse committed to selfless service i find it i'm curious
why there is no trace of ravim unaram if i was to google him or you know looking at any sort of
book around south wales or cardiff or educational pioneers can you comment on that in this message
you want to i would love to be able to comment on it and put some logic to it um but i think it's
for those who supposedly keep records of this city to look at themselves i have no idea why
such an important venue as the parade has been allowed to degenerate into what it has become
that no one seems to be concerned about that well a beautiful building full stop and secondly
what it stood for particularly at a time when the world is fragmenting what that building stood for
what that building stood for it opened people's minds to other ways of life other people's
viewpoints and that there is no recognition you know the recognition thing he wouldn't have given
a tuppence for it who are the people who recognize you anyway that that would have been his approach
he didn't care less about rewards he really didn't but i must say i i i can't believe there
is no record i mean you get um streets named after people who may have done some little thing
in cardiff or whatever you know and you think yeah well that's nice for them but there are
there are others in the city who have been sort of invisible i think of john reynolds former leader
of the council but coming back to your father as an what i would consider to be an innocent hero
i know that he was a complete role model for me amongst many other things you know he's very
paternal towards me and actually enabled me to to view the world through a different lens
to view a world of through inclusion and equality which was very rare and in short supply in the
1970s 80s 90s and even more so now so for me um he really was a trailblazer and one of the most
important figures in my life on so many levels you can say so you're more than welcome um
and i think that perhaps your father's humility because he didn't actually
talk brag about what was happening at the parade i don't think people actually understood or have
any sort of record and he never kept records i understand of what went on well i think he did
in in that it's here he kept the original documents of things i mean he very much kept the original
documents of things there's pure chance that i have the filing cabinet and the filing cabinet
literally moved from their old house in richmond road to here when my mum moved and no one's open
since today today is when i opened this filing cabinet and that would detail well it's coming
to going to the parade not only the parade but his university life his his job applications
after finishing university you know some of the most lowly jobs you can imagine that he should
have walked into not even getting an interview for you know it's just mindfully numbingly
numbingly unbelievable lab technicians jobs he would wipe the scientifically he could have wiped
the floor with them and there are letters of reference you know from his professor in cardiff
university when he finished his degree was finishing his degree he wanted him to stay on
and do a phd my dad didn't know many he couldn't do it he said no and professor asbray head of
botany at cardiff university wrote an open letter and said this man basically to power in parenthesis
i would say this man needs to be funded he really needs find it some way of giving cardiff university
couldn't do it you know them being them and uh there was no one out there to do it and to ask
really bluntly then do you feel that um his identity his race was a big factor in this
it's it's he would never say that he would never say that and i'm not going to jump on that
i i i would imagine they had bearings on certain aspects of his life without a doubt i mean you'd
be naive to think it didn't without a doubt the way he was treated you know not just within not
within not only within the indigenous population of cardiff but outside you know for example
he was working in the parade one night and um it's at the time when he was dealing with a lot of
iraqi and arab students coming in and this gentleman turned up and i think he was from
q8 and he was very smartly dressed and my dad was telling me and my dad was in the in the office and
he was wearing uh yeah what he's got on there you see that jacket and a jumper underneath so no tie
he's just as he is there very casual you know in that that outfit there and the man said to him
where's your boss and my dad being my dad said or just wait a minute um if you come in here and sit
down i'll go and get him for you so what he made him do he made him do you know the building in
28 parade is joined to cardiff high school field says a big basement that runs the length of the
building so my dad took him down into the basement made him walk the length of the corridor we just
have to go up here go up the stairs the other way walk back the other way then sat him down in his
my dad's office sat him down he said if you just wait here a minute i'll go and get him for you
he let him stew in there for about 10 minutes and he walked in and sat on the other side of the
desk and he said right what can i do for you and this is typical of your father's sense of humor
very cheeky and i think this possibly went over so many people because he was he was he was very
light-hearted but but he was never a victim he he would go out and you could see his his rapport
with teachers in schools you know and you'd have that embarrassing moment when your dad's coming up
the drive you know because you don't want your dad's job to be where you go to school you know
he would often come to our wouldn't he to hoardian because we had our english as a second language
department there and the teachers there they absolutely loved him they absolutely and he
would come to the school under the pretense of watching myself and my brother playing rugby
oh no no no he never actually saw me play rugby his back would be to the pitch and there's a group
of these fellow teachers on some touchline over there laughing and joking and you're thinking
dad's watching you play rugby right it was a social life with these other teachers you know
and this is what i mean about not negatively affecting your family life you didn't take that
oh no no no no no i i lived very much under the radar my older brother was pushing the boundaries
i let him get on with that because he was the first brother you know he he had the long hair and all
the rest of it and i let him take the flak i just did it quietly i used to sneak out late at night
you know very quietly my dad knew what was going on he said as new as as as long as i got home he
didn't care he didn't mind i told him i always told him where i was going usually to the students
i was still in school but i was going to the student union to watch bands i started doing that
at the age of 15 you know i disappear at about half past nine ten o'clock at night go and watch
bands there and then roll home was it hard for your mom with your dad being away from home
yeah most of the day yeah i think she appreciates it now and later on in life but she feels robbed
she felt robbed at the time because normal people were doing things but you could never get my dad
to go out for a meal it would never happen you know it never happened if he went out for a meal
he would usually go know the people because usually it'd be other italian restaurant or
indian restaurant so he'd know the people running the restaurant they'd make a big fess of him and
he didn't want that and he always used to say you know we'd go out in an indian restaurant you know
occasionally and we'd sit down and they'd come out oh mr mrem what do you want to eat anything you
want he said oh just get me a just grill me a piece of lamb nothing else no sauce on it just
grill me a piece of meat on there and i have a small whiskey that's it i don't want anything else
and he would sit there we'd have you know the full monte but he would never and you know trying to
arrange something you know to him to go out somewhere like my mum's birthday or his birthday
oh forget it his birthday but i do have a very lovely photograph of perhaps the last birthday
i think you really enjoyed was his 60th when we did a surprise party for him in the house
and it was good fun and the one before that was when the year before that we just had a
a thing in the garden just the family and he looked so relaxed you know jasmine is a baby
his granddaughter is a baby he's got her in his arms and it's just a perfect family moment and
if i think back to that day it's what i would call a perfect day that's what i would have called a
perfect day definitely
so just gonna say i had a little question if we just bring it slightly back to the then you speak
so much of your father's tolerance in your own life and his approach to parenting you do you think
his approach to sort of working with communities and helping liaison lots of people and allowing
people to experience each other's cultures did you see an impact on that and attitudes changing do
you think the parade was really a place where i mean you spoke about the parade and the parade
a place where i mean you spoke about it yourself that it opened your eyes to those things
yes most definitely i'll give you a specific example of that you know there are too many
stories to talk about but there is a specific example in the early 80s as used to happen during
our entire life train up we ended up with someone's child living with us you know a problem child
oh get my parents would get a phone call oh i can't manage this one can you um help out
and this was a phone call from q8 and the guy and the cape's father was working for a chemical
company it was iraqi by uh by birth but he was working for a park of lambert warner in ponte
pula chemical company and he said oh i can't he'd remarried and the son wasn't getting on
with the new mother you know was and he was of that difficult 13 14 age group so his father
decided that he'd met my dad some time ago and he said can you look after him for the summer
so this boy turned up the whole of the summer the first year he turned up um oh he just hated us
absolutely hated us the first few days of being here didn't want to be in our house didn't want
to be you know and my dad sort of as he used to do said oh can you take care of him you know
one of you or you know help out so he became my responsibility anyway this boy had so many pent
up hatreds against various backgrounds of people it was incredible you know he'd grown up in iraq
they were now living in q8 and um he came over here and one example oh i can't stand jews you
know i'm when we were in marx and spencer and a lot of stuff in marx spencer was made in israel
and he would go in there i'm not buying this i'm not buying that so we thought oh where's this
hatred coming from so we took him to a party in uh one of vince friend's house dave kitchener
you know from school we took him to a party and we didn't tell him kich was jewish and we just left
him to it and we're walking away at the end of the night and he's our bill he's such a fantastic guy
that was his nickname bill was such a fantastic guy um marvelous you know so the next day we said
to him do you know um he's jewish um perception changed same with korean people uh we went out
walking him my dad myself we aren't walking in the bracken beacons and he'd decided to leave all his
rubbish up in the mountains so i saw it and but i said we're gonna walk on a bit and i'm gonna make
him come back so we walked on for about a mile and i said oh you left something behind when we
left the last place you better go and pick it up because look around there's no rubbish here
so he was having an argument with me on this mountain top i said one of two things is going
to happen either you're going to go back and get it or you're going to be down there on the other
side anyway he stormed off came back and he said i don't see why i should do this in my country
koreans do this so i thought oh interesting interesting so following week my dad introduced
him to tong moon kim who was the martial arts instructor eight dan grandmaster he just went
he took him to the class just to let him see what was going on and he didn't tell him he's a korean
just said oh what do you think of this enraheed you know there's him doing all this amazing
martial arts stuff oh it's amazing amazing so at the end of it my dad said to him would you
like to ask him to pick your rubbish up he's a korean but it is about perceptions and integration
and people breaking down barriers and people mixing those those exchange groups were fantastic
because you get people with a viewpoint you know their little view of say stuttgart or their little
view of nant they come over here they meet people with a view of kardif but they things change and
it does change people and i feel very sorry that we've personally i feel very sorry that we seem
to have gone a little bit backwards in terms of all that integration that used to go on i think
you're interested that your father understood the power of dialogue and communication without doubt
so coming back to the community groups i know that the ismaili uganda ugandan asians used
the building and the prudhya committee i think they were their first iteration was at the
that's right yeah and that's still existing yes on isn't it the shrikachi diva patel samaj
they still using it they were using it until they had their center in grangetown
the india society rajagawals until they built the india center they all used to use i've got
photographs of your mum and rajagwal at an event in the in the parade you know they they're looking
at some material someone came in and was selling material and you know a good old asian woman can't
afford a can't avoid a material sale so they all were and so there were also samali refugees that
used the parade in the 90s is that right yeah all sorts of refuge you know you had the vietnamese
refugees all and you know you look at the way the vietnamese community is integrated into cardiff
life and has done well for itself and it is that i think immigrants bring a new perspective on life
especially immigrants who've been through a tough time they've realized that you know they've got an
opportunity to make their lives turn their lives around and given the right tools and the right
conditions they will flourish they will flourish it's when they're met with bigotry and hatred and
all the rest of it you know immigration is such a good thing look at america if it's allowed to
happen properly immigration is a marvelous thing
and i live what you're saying it's not just financially it's it's culturally what you learn
from other people what you learn from other people and their ways of life you know the gentleness
that comes along with so i i always was amazed how gentle the japanese people were we used to meet a
gentle civility to them to everything they did and some of the asian communities you know they
they have gentleness they weren't like us loud and brash they were nice people yeah i remember your
father recording a story of how the rastafarians used to use the basement in the 70s and but he
had to stop that because they were smoking weed and for the greater good he told them that they
couldn't use it anymore because you know they were smoking the herb and that didn't go down
too well so i think your father well there was ruffled feathers i think he did ruffle feathers
in and out of communities absolutely there were some some communities who thought he was in it
for himself i remember there was a community who some of whom attended my school who took a
delegation to the city hall to complain about him accusing him of favouritism towards other
communities and that's the last thing he would have done i mean there's a there's a shot somewhere
amongst all these photographs of him addressing a room full of people from and so-called community
leaders self-professed community leaders of all backgrounds in this room basically knocking their
heads together and saying listen to you because they were supposed to be you know having this
meeting where they could thrash things out and talk about their differences and you know come
to agreement you know basically we're all batting you know we're all should be singing from the same
hymn sheet about development of kids and all the rest of it but now there were these little agendas
going on and he basically tore them a new one that day and a lot of those people who are now
so a lot of whom are not around anymore but some of those guys for years afterwards talked about
that night it literally was a sobering moment for them to be talked to like that and said
yeah we realize now what we need to do bringing them together
but uh yeah he did ruffle feathers and i'm sure there were some people who thought
yeah uh he was having a go at uh because as i understood it weed was uh permissible into the
rastafarian communities as part of a religious ceremony but it couldn't happen in the parade
because the police would have been and for their good the police would have been on it like a ton
of bricks you know it wasn't as liberal as it is now and we're talking about ruffling feathers i
think he must have done that in education as well oh without a doubt i mean he was a thorn in the
side of authority and can you just unpack that please like why oh if i could i mean uh they were
telling me couldn't do something or that funding wasn't available he would fight tooth and nail
to get that funding or to secure a place for that particular person in a school when they were told
oh they're not going to mainstream school you know they should be educated somewhere else
or some headmaster had resisted but usually he had excellent relations with the headmasters it
was usually someone in the education office not at director level though because he always had a good
working relationship with the directors he cut through the crap he just yeah let's get this done
very much about that but he yeah he ruffled feathers he wasn't an establishment person at all
um he didn't attend the right dinners wasn't into it he preferred to be home
very much preferred to be home and go socializing with the right people after work never happened
with his staff he loved his staff absolutely loved the people of the parade agnes keen margo
mike adlington um you know little rick collett oh these people were priceless to him you know
absolutely priceless herb jan riot how can i i have photographs of herb jan teaching they're
in this group here absolute legend and of course let's just move to retirement because at that
point moment in retirement and if you could just confirm the date the um the parade was then handed
over to a female muslim woman from outside of kardif can you tell me when that was that was
april 1993 yeah and that was the time your father retired yeah okay yeah he literally came home from
work and he was ill from that day and i think what he did he fell on his sword he um he saw the
writing was on the wall funding wise and he took it very personally he'd seen the correspondence
he was involved with the exchange of the correspondence so he sacrificed himself
he literally sacrificed himself he went in and said i'm retiring because he wanted to create
opportunities for the people coming through i don't quite understand that he saw the funding
problems and yeah well the uh the fun they were going to trim down on the staff in the parade
simple as question of numbers and he thought that um if he goes it opens opportunities he was 62
and but i think he he would have been happy at working without doubt but um what we tried to do
when he retired we we we were working towards this vinnum myself we created an office for him in
richmond road we thought oh you know you can do all this other stuff without the shackles of south
glomorgan on your back you know the stuff you know he loved being a jp magistrate loved sitting in
the courts absolutely loved it again that was an opportunity to exercise life you know real life
issues you know people coming across that call some of them you know not everyone's a sob story
if you can you deserve to go to prison you're going to go to prison or you deserve a custodial
sentence you're going to get a custodial sentence but some people need a break and it's recognizing
that and it's also about disseminating that to your fellow members on the bench you speak to
people who we sat with on the bench you know for 30 years later they thought yeah he was good so
another another word of his tools apart from being on the refuge he always says he always said though
he recognized you know he worked in a time where the chair of the bench when he first came on it
was a woman called hilda cohen jewish lady whose husband was um isaac cohen of leo abse and going
cardiff's biggest at that time cardiff's bigger north of him and they were left wing good old
jewish people you know who were right on and you know they were first generation after the war to
come to cardiff and did very well and but they were very liberal and open-minded and he worked
with those people and some of it must have come off rubbed off on him you know have seen the way
they operate as well he always spoke highly he was never kept it to himself he always spoke highly of
people who influenced him in his life without a doubt never it wasn't all you know oh i invented
this you know he always spoke highly of people who had a major impact on his life
going back to his early days you know it's people in in his youth who were big mentors to him
i feel that we have only touched on your father's life um and what i think would be fitting is that
is there anything that you could put together in a short phrase or something that just sums up
your experience of your father the parade and maybe what resilience means yeah oh
crim's gonna be difficult this um well resilience that was that embodied everything about him
absolute resilience was uh being told you can't do something being told you know these it's
against the odds do that well that's the worst thing you could have said to him he'll show you
like how it can be done and never give up on someone never give up on someone you know he
would always try every avenue to make that person's life make them see that they can have a better life
or improve their situation or do what they want to do and kindness there was always a kindness there
always a kind person i think you know you you name it he was um kind to most people
you know he had a smile on his face and you wouldn't see the bad in people first off
always give them a chance always give everyone a chance and his ability to deal with people at
any level really any level be it queen cardinal pope you name it he'd be able to have conversations
with them that's been man me you know he'd be able to speak to anyone and you know show a genuine
interest in their lives not patronizing not patronizing as an institution the parade was
you talk to anyone from of that time about 28th parade they all knew what it meant you know people
from various communities or where's rapid is down in the parade oh yeah okay i'm going there they
knew what it was it was like but it was you know some people have a church and they know that's the
center of their community that's their bond for various communities across cardiff the parade was
it absolutely it a fact a building which i walked past in the mornings on my way to work sometimes
like i'm in tears at it sometimes i've gone in there i've gone behind the metal harris fencing
and cleared the rubbish from the steps because it's depressing to see what it has become and
what is allowed to become and this is a time look what's happening in the world this is what we need
this is what we need